## Meeting notes - 2016/09/22

Participants (in alphabetical order): Laura Canadillas Delgao (**LCD**), Laurent Chapon (**LC**), Oscar Ramon Fabelo Rosa (**ORFR**), Maria Teresa Fernandez Diaz (**MTFD**), Marie Helene Lemee Cailleau (**MHLC**), Estelle Mossou (**EM**), Eric Pellegrini (**EP**), Navid Qureshi (**NQ**), Alberto Rodriguez Velamazan (**ARV**)

### General:

* **LC** gave a short introduction on the current status of the project and how it will evolve in the future after its leaving
  * the DIF/ILL interaction with **EP** will have to be maintained to provide the necessary crystallographic feedback
  * using the developing expertise of DIF members (e.g. **NQ**) could be beneficial to the project
  * the collaboration with FRMII started from april 2016 with the contribution of Jonathan Fisher (**JF**) as a FTE on NSXTool
  * for the sake of coherence we will adopt in NSXTool the NeXuS file format developed by SCI/ILL in collaboration with FRMII even if we might not use the NeXuS tag. SCI will take in charge the development of a back-converter from this new format to the old ASCII file format. A first draft has been developed for D9 instrument and should be evaluated soon
  * **MHLC** will provide feedback for the integration of reference datasets

  * weak peak integration to be completed
  * reciprocal space viewer to be completed
  * reciprocal space hkl slicer to be completed

### To be done (in importance order)

* +++ setting reference datasets for D9, D19. The ones used by **ORFR** are good candidates
* +++ completing the weak peak integration scheme based on raytracing approach
* +++ completing the reciprocal space viewer
* +++ developing the reciprocal space hkl slicer
* ++ testing NeXuS file produced by SCI
* ++- developing a tool for setting manually the reciprocal lattice directly from the reciprocal space viewer
* ++- introduce the retreat approach for integrating weak peak based on their interpolation using a library built from strong peaks previously defined. This is also a request from our biodiff@FRMII colleagues and has been undertaken by **JF**.
* ++- case of incommensurate peaks
* ++ multi-crystal/twins
* + developing a collect strategy. The difficulty here is to define what is a good overlap i.e. which redundancy to take into account for measuring this overlap. Number of times the same peaks have been collected ? The symmetry of the crystal that allow to consider only a fraction of the reciprocal space ? To be decided. Eventually an NOMAD XBU file should be output from the collect strategy taking into account the instrument physical limitations.

### Update - 2016/09/23
  * the unstability of the lattice minimizer that produced wrong lattice parameters was mainly due to an improper use of the non-linear fitting engine provided by eigen library. The use of the one provided by GSL 2.0 produced very good results @ FRMII. Hence, the parameters used for the minimization using eigen implementation have been modified by **JF** and produce much better results now.
  * **LC** and **ORFR** have found and solved severe bugs that triggered poor integration results from NSXTool compared with retreat. The results of the integration from NSXTool are now better than retreat for the reference dataset proposed by **ORFR**. The bugs found was:
    * the ShellX output was not correctly set in NSXTool
    * some peaks on the border of the window was considered in the integration workflow
    * some spurions was still output in the ShellX even if previously discarded from the peak table viewer

